>>LISA GARR: Hello and welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr.
With all of the demands
on your time these days,
between work and family
and relationships
and a constant demand to
answer your email or your texts
all day, are you
feeling that you're
getting tugged in several
different directions?
Do you think that a
state of enlightenment
is for other people
who have time
for things like meditation?
Joining me today is spiritual
teacher and cultural visionary,
Andrew Cohen.
And he's here to talk about
his book, "Evolutionary
Enlightenment: A New Path
to Spiritual Awakening"
and how to achieve practical
spirituality without feeling
like you are being
tugged and split
in several different directions.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you for joining me.
>>ANDREW COHEN: Thank you, Lisa.
I'm thrilled to be with you.
>>LISA: I'm glad you're
with me because you're
going to bring
this whole concept
and topic of enlightenment
to a level that
is practical for
people like me, who
tend to live a little
bit of a busy life.
What is your perspective
of enlightenment?
>>COHEN: My perspective
of enlightenment
>>LISA: It's a big
question, I know.
>>COHEN: It's a very big
question to start with.
Well, I think probably
the word means
many things in many
different circumstances.
But I suppose, just to
begin our conversation,
it means discovering, at an
experiential level, a sense
of ultimacy, discovering
a non-relative or absolute
dimension or position in
relationship to life that
frees one from existential
doubt and existential fear.
Because a lot of us are
consciously and unconsciously
confused, knowingly
or unknowingly,
about what's the point
of this experience?
Why am I here?
Is life good?
So experiences like
these really answer
these fundamental
existential questions
that all human beings have.
For some people they're more
conscious; for other people
they're less unconscious.
And essentially it
removes all doubt
about whether life is
good and whether I really
want to be here.
>>LISA: How did you get
started on this entire path
of your journey, your
spiritual journey?
>>COHEN: Well, I was brought up
in a secular Jewish household
in New York, so I
had no notion of God
or spirit or really
anything higher.
And then when I
was 16 years old,
I was living in Rome in
Italy with my mother.
And we were sitting up
late one night having
a conversation--and I don't
remember what we were talking
about--but for no
particular reason,
the doors of perception opened,
and I had an experience.
I had what's called a
transrational experience.
In other words, it's difficult
to understand rationally,
but this is what happened.
So the doors of
perception opened,
and I became aware
of beginninglessness
and endlessness, that which had
no beginning and no end, right?
All sense of boundaries and all
sense of limitation fell away.
>>LISA: Was it different than
the prior moments you were
experiencing--
>>COHEN: Completely different.
>>LISA: --as a teenager?
It would be like living
in a small little cabin
and opening the door and
falling into infinite space.
>>LISA: Wow.
And it was a cosmic
cracking of consciousness.
>>COHEN: Well, I was literally
aware of the infinite.
It was more tangible.
It was the awareness
of the infinite,
or beginninglessness and
endlessness was more tangible,
was more real in
those few moments
than anything else I'd ever
experienced in my life.
And that, of course, is
what makes experiences
like that so extraordinary.
There was a quality
of this infiniteness
that was of overwhelming love.
But it was a kind
of love that it's
hard to relate to anything that
we normally relate to that word
because it was
completely overwhelming.
It was breathtaking.
It was crushing.
And it almost felt like
if the intensity of what
I was experiencing didn't
stop, I might not make it.
I might not survive.
I mean, that's
how strong it was.
I was in a state of awe, and
I was in a state of wonder.
>>LISA: What did your mother do?
Did she see this
happening in your face?
>>COHEN: Yeah.
Well, yeah, tears were
streaming down my face.
But I wasn't even
crying, I was in a state
of awe at the splendor
and the glory of it all.
She didn't really know
what was happening to me.
We were in two
different dimensions.
Our physical bodies were
sitting in the same room,
but we were in two completely
different dimensions
of existence.
And I remember at that
time that I'd recently
seen a documentary
about Buddhism.
And in that documentary, there
was an image of a huge statue
somewhere in the jungles
of Southeast Asia,
and there were hundreds
of monks prostrating
before this enormous
Buddha statue.
But because I hadn't had
any experiences like this,
I didn't understand why
any human being would
bow down and prostrate before--
>>LISA: A statue.
>>COHEN: --a statute.
I wouldn't even know
why a human being would
want to prostrate
before anything.
And I remember in that
moment, I suddenly
understood what was
the sentiment that
was being expressed when
those monks were bowing down
before the image of Lord Buddha.
And--
>>LISA: Did that cause you to
want to go to those regions
and find out more about it?
>>COHEN: Well, not then.
I mean, I didn't really know
what it was that was happening.
I just knew that in
those few moments--
I don't exactly know
how long it lasted--
I had been more in touch with
reality, more awake, more alive
than I had been in
all of my 16 years.
And so this made a very deep and
profound impression on my soul.
But at that time, I
had other interests.
I wanted to be a jazz musician.
And I didn't really know what
to do with the experience.
I told people about
it, and most people
didn't have any idea really
what it meant or what it was.
It was interesting.
At the end of this experience,
I received a message.
And I know this sounds like
a strange thing to say,
but what it was was, if you give
your life to me and me alone,
you have nothing to fear.
And I didn't know what it meant.
And the implication
was that if I
didn't follow this
invitation from the unknown,
so to speak, that I was
going to be in trouble,
that I was going to
have a hard time.
And so I went on to pursue
my interest in music.
And when I was--
>>LISA: Did you pay attention
to that message at the time,
or just ignore it because you
didn't know what to do with it?
>>COHEN: I just was
aware that it happened.
But you see, Lisa, I
didn't have any context
in order to be able to relate
to it or know what it meant.
I hadn't been interested
in these matters before.
It was like suddenly
diving deep into the ocean
after not even knowing
that the ocean existed.
>>LISA: Being in the
desert, right, right?
>>COHEN: Oh yeah, I didn't
even know the ocean existed.
So it was a powerful
awakening experience.
But the thing is, when
the experience was over,
I didn't really know
what to do with it.
But then when I was
in my early 20s,
I began to be haunted
by this event.
I mean, it was a
difficult time in my-- I
was having, as a
young adult, things
weren't going very
well in my life.
But I was being haunted
by this experience,
and there was a sense
that this was my calling.
So at a certain
point when I was 22,
I made up my mind
that I was going
to devote my life to
the rediscovery of what
had visited me spontaneously.
>>LISA: And at that point,
did you begin your travels?
Where did you start?
>>COHEN: Well, I was living
in New York at the time.
And so I did all the
things that seekers do.
I learned how to meditate.
I started getting up
very early and reading
books about meditation
and yoga and philosophy.
I wanted to learn everything.
I wanted to see every possible
different kind of teacher
from every different
kind of tradition.
I was voraciously curious.
And I've always been a
very skeptical person,
curious and skeptical, but
also very sincere and earnest.
And I had many teachers.
I went through all kinds
of different experiences
with meditation with
different people,
with different individuals
and different groups.
And I was learning and learning
and learning and learning.
And because I was a baby boomer,
when we became interested
in spirit, we didn't look
to our own traditions.
Because I'm Jewish, I didn't
look to my own tradition.
I looked to the East.
And at that time, all the
most famous luminaries,
the greatest Indian spiritual
teachers and masters,
were all coming to the West.
And I'd also met
many people that
had spent long periods
of time in India.
And when I met
them, I could tell
that they weren't necessarily
that much more enlightened
than I was, which
meant that I knew
that going to India,
itself, wasn't the answer.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>COHEN: But I felt very
compelled to go anyway.
At a certain point
when I was 27,
I felt I wanted to
go for a few months.
>>LISA: Part of your journey.
>>COHEN: Well, I
was just curious,
even though I had already
had a lot of experiences
and met many teachers
and that kind of thing.
And when I arrived
there, I suddenly
felt an enormous
feeling of happiness.
And the reason was is because
I was a very dedicated seeker.
I mean, I wanted to become
an enlightened person.
That was more important
to me than anything else.
And of course, if you live in
New York City, everybody looks
at, what do you do?
Everyone says, what do you do?
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>COHEN: And I didn't really
have a very good response.
I would tell people what
I was interested in,
and most people looked--
they were polite.
But I could tell
they couldn't relate
to what I was
interested in, and they
thought I was little crazy.
>>LISA: You would
tell them that you
were interested in
becoming enlightened?
>>COHEN: I can't remember
exactly what I said--
>>LISA: Yeah, I mean, but that's
basically what you were-- yeah.
>>COHEN: Something in that--
I mean, I wasn't naive.
I probably would
have put it in words
that would have
been at least they
would have been receptive to.
But it wasn't anything most
people could relate to.
So when I arrived
in India, I just
felt this freedom
that I could really
pursue this passion I had
without any inhibitions.
Because India is a place
where people can get
lost, and they can also escape.
And it's a place where
people can truly awaken.
So I had a small
income at the time.
It wasn't much, but it was
enough to live in India.
And I decided I wasn't
going to go back.
>>LISA: So you stayed.
>>COHEN: So I stayed.
And I stayed for
2 and 1/2 years.
>>LISA: Did you
find a teacher there
that you resonated
with and learned from?
>>COHEN: Well,
right before I left,
I heard of a teacher who
eventually became very famous,
but at that time he
was very little known.
His name was H.W.L Poonja
or Poonjaji, or as Papaji
as he's become known.
And he was a disciple of the
great 20th-century renowned
spiritual master
Ramana Maharshi.
He was a direct disciple of his.
And I'd had never met a
master of Advaita Vedanta
or a disciple of the
great Ramana Maharshi.
And I'd heard a lot
about him from a friend,
and so I was very curious and
interested to go visit him.
I was actually on
my way to Korea.
I was going to go
live a life of a monk.
I was going to go live--
I knew at that point
that this thing was
going to happen to me.
I was very convinced.
I had a lot of
confidence about it.
I just felt I needed
to be in a place
where I'd be able to live
a very disciplined life.
And I was sure, sooner or later,
it was just a matter of time.
So I was more or less
on my way to leave India
when I went to visit him.
And as I said, at the
time he was quite unknown.
He was an old man.
He was living in his
son's house in Lucknow.
And when I went into
the room to see him,
he was sitting on his
bed in an undershirt.
He was a family-- he'd
been a householder.
So he didn't have religious
attire on or robes
or anything like that.
He was just sitting
in his undershirt
and alone on his bed.
And I'd been a seeker
for a long time.
I'd seen a lot of teachers.
And I wanted to let him know
that I didn't expect much
from him.
And I said, I have
no expectations.
And he said, well, that's good.
And he obviously had
a tremendous amount
of confidence, a deep,
otherworldly confidence.
And so I sat on the floor
in front of his bed.
And I was with a
friend, and we started
asking him some questions.
And the question was, how much
effort does it take to be free?
And he whispered, he
whispered, he said,
you don't have to make
any effort to be free.
And when he whispered
those few words,
something happened inside
my being, my consciousness.
I suddenly became aware
of a brook of water
running down the side of a hill.
I realized that my true nature
was like that water, which
was that, like water, nothing
can obstruct the flow of water.
It was always free.
And I realized in that moment
that I had never been unfree,
that the illusion had
been-- that bondage
was an illusion, that there was
a block or something in my way
had been the illusion.
What was real, was true, and
what had always been true
is that I'd always been free.
I just had never
known it before.
And I was just
looking at the ground.
This probably took
about 10 seconds.
I was looking at the ground,
and he said, that's it!
And he burst out.
And I looked up and I
said, how did you know?
Because this was just 10 seconds
or 20 seconds of silence.
And he burst out laughing.
And that was the--
>>LISA: He saw
that shift in you.
>>COHEN: Yeah.
Then I said, well,
who is this man?
So then I spent three
weeks in Lucknow,
and I stayed in some
small hotel by myself.
And I would go visit
him in the mornings,
and we'd go for walks.
And then I would go to
his-- I would usually
have lunch with his family
and his son's family.
Then I would go.
Come back in the afternoons
after he had a nap,
and we'd spend time
going for walks,
having talks, just
sitting quietly together.
And he answered a couple
of fundamental questions
that I had.
And one was I wanted to know-- I
had had this initial experience
when I was a young
teenager of the fullness,
of the effulgence of the
splendor of the absolute.
>>LISA: Did he
uncover that for you?
>>COHEN: Well, right.
But then I had been
spending time with Buddhists
and doing all kinds of
Buddhist meditations.
And Buddha said
that "emptiness is
the ultimate nature of reality."
And I was very confused.
I said, well, what is the
ultimate nature of reality?
It was a very profound
existential question for me.
And I asked him, what's
the ultimate truth?
Is it fullness or emptiness?
>>LISA: Was it emptiness?
>>COHEN: And he said,
they're both two
sides of the same coin.
>>LISA: Ah.
So it's--
>>COHEN: So they are one.
And from one
perspective, there's
emptiness, and the other
perspective they're fullness.
But they're not
two, they're one.
So this relieved a
tremendous amount
of existential doubt
and struggle I had.
And the last thing
that happened,
as I told him about this
extraordinary thing that
happened when I was 16,
this amazing visitation
from the unknown, and I
told him in a lot of detail,
and he looked at me and he said,
you already know everything.
And because of his tremendous
spiritual authority,
the minute he said that,
I could feel something let
go in the core of my being.
And this kind of
catapulted me into kind
of an altered state
of consciousness
and catalyzed a process that
happened after I left him.
But this, it was
almost like that I
was able to accept at a very
deep level something that
had been revealed to me when
I was a very young person.
And then, finally, after
three weeks, I was gonna--
I left him for a few
weeks to go visit friends.
And he'd tell me, something very
big is going to happen to you.
And I said, really?
He said, yeah, something very
big is going to happen to you.
When I was with him, as often
happens in these circumstances,
I would go from
thinking that I'm
with some extraordinary
spiritual giant,
some spiritual master that
the world does not know about,
to I'm with just some
crazy old man that
doesn't know what
he's talking about.
>>LISA: I'm sure that went--
>>COHEN: So when he told me
that something big was going
to happen, I didn't know
what he was talking about.
I didn't know how he could
possibly know anyway.
But then when I left him, I left
him and took the train to New
Delhi, something happened,
some energetic current
had started to flow
inside my being.
But it wasn't really
in my physical body,
but it's something that I felt.
It was a current of bliss,
an intensity of energy
that would wax and wane.
It would get very intense, and
it would get to be too much,
and it would fall back again.
And this lasted for
about three weeks.
And I felt like I
was being consumed
by a presence, an energetic
presence that I couldn't see.
And it was the most
incredible-- it
was the most incredible
time in my life.
And when I went to
Delhi, I met a friend,
and I started telling them
what had happ-- you know,
my time with this
extraordinary man.
And as I told them
the story, they
were catapulted into the
same state of consciousness
that I was in.
And then I didn't know
what was happening.
Because what was my-- what felt
like my own purely subjective
experience began to be this
inter-subjective or shared
experience with another person.
And this started
happening with all people
that I was sharing
my process with.
They actually started to
experience it directly
themselves.
When this happened,
this really--
>>LISA: Blew your
mind, I'm sure, yes.
>>COHEN: Blew my mind
in the biggest way.
And so that continued
for these three weeks.
>>LISA: So it was an
energetic transmission
almost of experience.
>>COHEN: Very,
extremely powerfully.
And then after three weeks,
I went back to see him.
And all my doubts about him had
left, and I fell at his feet.
And he burst out laughing.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>COHEN: And so
this was a real--
it was a fairy tale story.
He thought at the time
he was going to die.
He was quite ill.
So he told me, "I want you
to accept responsibility
for the work," quote unquote.
I give you my robe and ball.
And I didn't really know what
to make of all these things.
I was flipping
into another world
that I felt I had no
background or training for.
And then I left him, and I went
with a small group of friends
to Rishikesh in northern India.
That's where the Beatles
went to be with the Maharishi
on the Ganges.
>>LISA: Very famous area, yeah.
>>COHEN: We stayed there for,
it was for about six weeks.
And then I became a
spiritual teacher overnight.
I was teaching all
day and every night.
We'd all sit in my room
together, and we would spend--
>>LISA: And the teachings
that you had learned from--
>>COHEN: Well, no.
What happened was it
was very spontaneous.
I suddenly had access to a
level of wisdom and depth
and knowledge that I felt
I hadn't been trained for.
It suddenly was there.
It was like going from 0 to 60.
And so then it was
really a process
of surrendering to a process
that was happening to me.
And I also had to be willing
to trust him unconditionally
because he told me this
was going to be my destiny
and this is what
I was going to do.
And so I didn't
believe I was ready.
I didn't believe I
could do such a thing.
But I needed to trust him.
And in doing that, it
was happening by itself.
>>LISA: So do
these concepts have
to do with what you
teach around non-duality?
>>COHEN: Well, whenever we
use the word enlightenment,
we're always pointing to an
experience of non-duality.
But what's interesting
to understand
is that the meaning of that
word has evolved and shifted
over time, especially in
relationship to Eastern
spirituality and to
the Eastern traditions.
>>LISA: Non-dualism has?
>>COHEN: Yes.
Well, absolutely.
So for example, in the
original Buddhist teaching,
the original Buddhist
teaching, his enlightenment
was about the experience
of transcending the world
completely, about entering into
a very deep, meditative state.
>>LISA: Right.
>>COHEN: And when
we meditate, when
we enter into a
meditative state,
we make the effort to
transcend the mind,
to go beyond the
thinking process.
And when you go beyond the
mind and go beyond the thinking
process, as the conditioned
movement of thought
moves into the background,
interestingly enough,
simultaneously our awareness
of the passing of time moves
into the background.
And when thought and mind
move into the background,
time moves into the background.
So when thought and mind and
time move into the background,
our awareness of
the external world
also moves into the background.
>>LISA: I can understand that.
>>COHEN: And so
if we keep letting
go and keep letting
go, what will happen
is when-- thought
eventually will disappear.
When thought disappears,
time disappears.
When time disappears, our
awareness of the world
disappears.
When our awareness of the world
disappears, if we keep letting
go and keep letting
go, eventually even
our sense of and awareness
of our own physical form
disappears.
So when mind disappears,
time disappears.
When time disappears,
world disappears.
When world disappears,
ultimately form disappears.
So when everything disappears,
we make the greatest discovery
that all the greatest
mystics from all
the great mystical
traditions had,
which is when everything
disappears, I'm still here.
I didn't go anywhere.
>>LISA: Right, right.
That's not very
practical if I disappear.
>>COHEN: No, no.
But we realize, because we
usually think, I'm the body,
I'm the mind, I'm
the personality.
And you realize when all
of that has disappeared,
when there's not even--
and there's no memory left,
our most intimately felt
sense of self is here
and is experienced as
beginningless and emptiness--
beginningless and endless.
Who I am has no
beginning and no end.
This is-- and this
is merely-- this
is the human form, shape
and form of who I am.
So what the Buddha was
teaching was the awakening--
the original Buddhist
teaching was awakening
to this timelessness
and formlessness, which
has been called the
ground of being,
timeless, formless being.
And so in the
original teaching, he
said that when you
awaken to being,
you awaken to the unborn, to
the deathless, to the uncreated,
to that which exists
before time and space.
You awaken to the
part of yourself
that has never been born.
So when you awaken to
that part of yourself,
you realize that the deepest
dimension of yourself
and the deepest dimension
of reality itself
is immortal and
uncreated and unborn.
And when you realize
that, it frees you
from attachment to this body, to
this mind, to this personality.
That was the Buddha's
original teaching.
>>LISA: And that's-- OK.
>>COHEN: But then
about 800 years later
in Buddhism with the
Mahayana revolution,
they realized that the nature of
the world, the nature of form,
is ultimately the same
as emptiness, all right.
The emptiness, this
timeless, formless
emptiness, this
ground of reality.
They realized that everything,
that the material world
is one with and not separate
with this primary foundation
of emptiness itself.
And that was when--
in the Heart Sutra
the Buddha says,
"Form is emptiness
and emptiness is form."
Form and emptiness
are one and not two.
And so in Mahayana-- in Mahayana
Buddhism, the world of form
is also embraced as emptiness.
In other words, the feeling
of I need to escape the world
or transcend the world
in order to become
enlightened is not true anymore.
Now I can embrace
the world of form
and use the experience of being
here in the world as a way
to become enlightened.
And there's been a third
turning of the wheel,
and that's what my
new book is all about.
And that's what the
new enlightenment
is all about, which is the
awakening to evolution.
Because we realize that it
was out of this primordial
emptiness, from this primordial
emptiness, this void,
that the Big Bang happened,
that the creative process
emerged from
primordial emptiness.
And this is when you
realize that everything
that exists in the world
of time and space-- matter
and energy, right, and sentient
life-- came from nothingness.
And we realize it's
actually going somewhere.
Evolutionary process means
we're on a creative journey.
>>LISA: There's a video that
we have that shows this.
>>COHEN: Oh, good.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That gives us an idea of
what this evolution is about.
Let's take a look at that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-Let yourself follow this
theological fantasy just
for a moment.
Imagine what it would be like to
be God, resting in a perfectly
blissful, overwhelmingly
peaceful state of being
for infinite eons of no time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In that profound stillness,
nothing is missing.
And there is no
desire whatsoever.
Absolutely nothing has occurred.
That's where you were before the
beginning, before the Big Bang.
Perfect peace and
boundless bliss.
Quietude without end.
Unburdened by the
weight of existence,
you could not have
been more content.
Yet, for some reason, out
of that perfect contentment
you made a decision
to create the cosmos.
You chose to manifest
a material universe
from your own
unmanifest emptiness.
You could have continued
to rest happily
in being, meditating
on nothingness
for more countless eons
of infinite no time.
But you had already
done that forever.
So you chose to take the
unthinkable step and endeavour
to manifest your own
self in and through form.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Where did that choice come from?
Where in that empty
perfection would the impetus
arise to do something so vast,
so complex, so overwhelming?
What could be a
greater challenge
than to create something out of
nothing, to manifest a material
universe before form
had never existed?
But you apparently decided to
take that unimaginable step.
How do I know?
Because it's happening.
Because we are here now, 14
billion years later reflecting
on this very question.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And considering the
fact that at the deepest
level of consciousness
itself, there is only one,
and that one is
who you always are,
you would have to conclude
that at every step of the way,
from before the
beginning in infinite
no time, through
the choice to take
the plunge from
formlessness into form,
and up until the
present moment, it
could only be you
and you alone who
is responsible for all of this.
Who else could it possibly be?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So there's a
piece there that I'm
wanting you to tie this
all together for me.
How does this have--
What does this
have to do with our practical,
daily, busy, chaotic lives?
You mentioned this non-duality.
And that's what I'm
trying to figure out here
is how do you bring this
cosmic consciousness,
this evolutionary enlightenment
conversation to a place where
we are not so separate in
our thinking and so confused?
>>COHEN: Well, non-duality
means there's only one.
It technically means not two.
So it means that the ultimate
truth about who you are
and who I am, and the ultimate
truth about the nature
of reality itself is that
there's only one and not two.
And so the-- I
mean, existentially,
human beings tend to
feel fearful and--
>>LISA: Separate.
>>COHEN: --frightened
and confused--
>>LISA: And fragmented.
>>COHEN: --when they
feel separate from.
So when one has a
mystical experience--
and mystical
experiences are usually
an experience, of some way,
of the perennial truth,
the perennial
experience, recognition
of the ultimate truth
about the nature of reality
and of the self, which is that
there's only one and not two.
So the way we can
define that is--
there are different
ways to define that.
In the traditional
Eastern enlightenment,
which is what I originally
learned from my teacher,
there is the-- he awakened me
to what the Buddha was pointing
to, the deepest
dimension of reality
and the deepest dimension of
the human experience, which
is this ground of being, this
place where there's no time
and there's no space.
We enter into a very
deep state of meditation.
When everything
disappears, we become aware
of no time, no space, and no
form, and infinite freedom.
And so when you experience
that, you realize everything
that exists comes from
this primordial ground.
And what's liberating
is I am, right, you
know, I am that
timeless, formless--
>>LISA: Infinite space.
>>COHEN: --infinite
space, right.
That's who I really am.
And so when you come
back into the world then,
there's a sense of no
longer being so attached to
and identified all the
relative notions of self.
>>LISA: So the idea that
we look at ourselves
as separate from everything,
where our work is
separate than ourself,
that's separate
than our family, and
our relationships,
and all of those
things are separate
is where we're actually
draining off and siphoning off
our energy to all of
these things that we
think are separate.
And what you're saying is
that that is all actually
the same thing, that
that's all one thing,
and that we don't have
to drain our energy.
That we could fill
ourselves up, basically,
with all of the different things
that we do by realizing they're
all one.
>>COHEN: Well, when one has a
deep and profound experience
of the ultimate unity of
being and of existence itself,
when you realize it is all one,
I am and you are and we all
are that one without a second,
right, I am and you are,
we all are, and this all is
part and parcel of one event,
of one happening.
When I realize that is
my identity, right, not
my separate personality, not
my personal identity, not
my ethnic identity, not
my national identity--
>>LISA: Right.
>>COHEN: --but this is who
I am, it's who you are,
it's what we all are
and what all this is,
we realize it's all part of
one process and one happening.
And when we make that
shift of identity,
we no longer see this
being separate from that,
or that being separate
from the other thing,
or this being separate.
>>LISA: And that's truly what
all is one, we are all one,
really means.
>>COHEN: Well, we see
everything that occurs inwardly
and outwardly--
>>LISA: As one.
>>COHEN: --in life.
No, within the context of
one happening, of one event.
We see everything
that's happening
is all part of one
unified process.
Different things are going on.
I have different life
circumstances than you do.
Maybe certain things
that are challenging me
that are different than
what your challenges are.
But the thing is--
But when you see all
of this is happening
within the context of
it being one happening,
it changes the way we see it.
We see it's all one event.
In other words, I see my own
personal inner experience,
my own personal
challenges, and what's
happening-- events
that are happening
in the world at large, globally,
as all part of one unfolding.
>>LISA: That's what
I was going to ask.
So is part of a financial
devastation or a global crisis
all part of this
oneness as well?
>>COHEN: It's all part of one
process that is in progress.
It's like one big movie.
It's one big-- it's one
big show that's happening.
And there's no part of that
particular movie that's
separate from any
other part, ultimately,
from a mystical
perspective, you see?
And so when you realize, we
cease to compartmentalize--
to really answer your question--
we cease to compartmentalize
the way we see our lives.
So often, many people
will say, well,
I have a spiritual practice
for 10 minutes a day,
or 20 minutes a
day, or whatever it
is, where I want to connect
with my notion of whatever
the absolute is.
And then I have my
day-to-day life.
And I try to tell everyone, what
happens every day is your life.
That's the whole thing.
>>LISA: That's the point.
>>COHEN: And so we want to stop
because it's all one unfolding.
And when you realize--
when you see it
all from a perspective
of non-duality,
it's all a spiritual happening.
>>LISA: Well, though,
how do you explain
the pain that people are in,
and the devastation that people
feel, or when you experience
the death of a loved one?
You're saying that's really
all the same experience?
>>COHEN: Well, I mean,
death is part of life.
I mean, death is part of life.
It's an inseparable
part of life.
And when we truly embrace
the inherent unity
of all existence, we also have
to accept the truth of change.
And the Buddha said,
"Everything changes."
And so that which is
born is ultimately
going to die and pass away.
But we realize that the creative
process itself is immortal.
And that original
experience I told you
that I had when I
was a teenager, one
of the profound things
that became clear to
me is that there's no such
thing as death, right?
So the thing is is that which
is born is going to die.
This body is going
to die eventually,
and that body's going to die.
But the energy and
intelligence that gave
rise to the creative
process itself is immortal.
So who you ultimately
are, who you really
are, who I ultimately and
really am is immortal.
And so we have to learn how
to expand our perspective
and see the relative
nature of who
we are, this body, this
mind, this personality,
and the relative circumstances
of this particular life
as relative circumstances
within an infinite process
of unfolding.
>>LISA: OK.
So then I also want to ask
you about how this relates
to self-confidence and
how we would experience
being truly authentic with
who we are without feeling
that we're stuck in
things like pain.
And this has a lot to do with
what you talk about in terms
of a narcissistic society
that we have become.
And that's a whole
different conversation
we're going to have
in just a second.
But let's-- there's a great
piece that you've got here that
talks about our authentic
self and who we truly are.
Take a look at
this because we'll
talk about this piece
in just a second.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>What I'm calling the authentic
self, or the creative principle
or Eros, only reveals
itself through action.
When something came
from nothing, right,
there was a movement
from absolute stillness
to unceasing activity.
What I'm calling
the authentic self
does not reveal
itself in meditation.
You can't awaken to the
authentic self in meditation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So the authentic self is-- how
you see it, it's unmistakable.
It's this unselfconscious
creativity.
Any creative individual,
from a genius trial lawyer
to a passionate,
ego-less public servant
to a great poet or
writer-- anybody
who's completely committed
to the creative endeavor
at any level, who reached
a level of mastery
where there's an unselfconscious
intelligence that's surging
through them expressing
that which transcends,
but it includes, but
transcends the world,
that's what the
authentic self is.
So usually this is
understood as kind
of-- it's called creativity.
But what I've done with this
notion of authentic self
is to say, well,
OK, now we're not
talking about making
music or making art.
We're talking about freeing
the self so the self
itself can become the instrument
that's playing that music.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: OK.
So how are these concepts
practical to us today?
How do you get here?
How do you get to this place?
What are some of the
teachings around that?
>>COHEN: Well, I think--
I mean, the first thing
here is we have to be willing
to experience enormous-- allow
ourselves to experience enormous
frustration at the generally
superficial relationships
to existence that many of us
seem to tolerate without
it really bothering us.
We have to get to
a point, I believe,
where we get fed up with
living on the surface of life.
Because there's a certain
point, I think, when we get to--
and this happened
in my own life--
when I kind of
realized, you know,
if I didn't really wake
up, if I didn't achieve
some kind of
enormous breakthrough
and big transformation,
I was never
going to really be fully alive.
>>LISA: So what do you
mean by that frustration?
What does that look like?
>>COHEN: Well,
there's a frustration.
In other words, there's a
sense that, what am I doing?
Like what am I doing,
and why am I doing it?
And whose life am
I living anyway?
A lot of us aren't really
living our own lives.
I mean, to live
an authentic life,
we really have to-- we
have to dig very deep.
We have to be willing to
struggle with very big ideas,
challenge ourself, face
into the big questions,
peer way beyond the
boundaries of where
most people are willing to look.
And I think we have to
be willing to get fed up
with a life that's not
being lived with depth.
In other words, to live a
life of meaning and mastery
and what I call spiritual
self-confidence,
we have to be willing to make
the effort to break through
to the very center of what it
means to exist and to know that
for ourselves.
>>LISA: So the steps,
the how-to steps to this,
and the one, two, three to
that, or to breathing to relax
and so forth, is
really us just trying
to put a Band-Aid
on the frustration
that we're feeling with life?
>>COHEN: Well, these
days, you know, it's here.
And it's also true
in India, by the way.
I spent a lot of
time there recently.
People experience
a lot of stress.
Life is very stressful.
The speed in which we're living
is getting quicker and quicker.
So it does create
a lot of stress.
It creates a lot of
insecurity, and it
creates a lot of anxiety.
So understandably, people
look to spiritual teachers
and spiritual
methodologies as a way
to calm down, to feel less
stressful and less frightened.
And if we learn how
to meditate, and we
learn some breathing exercises
and this kind of thing,
and learn how to
stretch our bodies out
and this kind of thing,
we can find a way
to experience a little bit
more equanimity or being
less anxious.
But there's a deeper
question, which
is you can calm yourself down.
We can calm down and
feel more peaceful.
But it doesn't necessarily
mean we've really
made any profound
breakthroughs that
have liberated us
on a soul level.
>>LISA: So it's more
of a temporary level.
>>COHEN: No, it's just a shift
in our emotional experience.
Instead of feeling
stressed out, we calm down.
You can have a couple of
drinks and calm down also.
But that doesn't
necessarily change or affect
the state of one's soul at all.
So what does is--
all the greatest
philosophers and the greatest
mystics throughout history
are individuals who
realized that they
had to get to the
very bottom of it.
I've got to get to the bottom
of what it means to exist.
And when-- and it's--
and we can do that.
And the greatest luminaries,
spiritual luminaries
throughout history, are
individuals, men and women,
who are kind of
spiritual heroes.
They've broken through to a
level of depth of experience
and perspective
and understanding,
where they really know,
where they're grounded.
They're grounded at a level of
depth that, for most people,
is unimaginable.
And so I think that are the
spiritual practices that we
do, assuming we're
doing any, are
as powerful as is our
aspiration to truly become
a liberated,
transformed individual.
In other words, a lot of us,
we're already on a trajectory.
We're already going.
We're very busy.
And we want to find
a way to feel better
doing what we're already doing.
When the question is maybe we
don't know what the heck we're
doing, and there might be
a much more wholesome, more
philosophically profound
and spiritually honest
relationship to life that we
have to be willing to consider.
But most people are afraid
to think too deeply,
to question too deeply,
to ask questions
that are too big because
they might find out
that they've made wrong choices.
But I mean, we have to
be willing to do that.
We have to be willing
to ask ourselves
those kind of
questions, you know.
We want to get on solid ground.
>>LISA: So maybe the
questions or the goals
of making more money, or
getting to the bigger house,
or climbing the corporate
ladder, or whatever those goals
and aspirations are,
when you get there
and you find emptiness, you
realize that that's not really
the true goal at all.
>>COHEN: Well
that's what we hear.
We hear, you know-- it hasn't
been my experience in life,
but we hear from
people who have thought
that wealth, enormous wealth,
would give them happiness.
Apparently they find
that it's not true,
that wealth and
power, especially
for thoughtful, sensitive
people, doesn't liberate.
And quite the opposite.
It can-- also can create
enormous anxiety and confusion.
>>LISA: This, yes, duality
ultimately, dualism.
>>COHEN: Dualism or worse.
And so I think the fundamental
thing we're speaking about here
is just finding a way.
Just using spiritual techniques
or teachings as a way
simply to calm down, I
think, is not really enough.
We have to be willing
to make the effort
to want to really break through
to something very profound
that will realign our
relationship to existence
in a fundamental way, a
fundamental realignment
in which we become
deeply grounded in life,
and in being, and in the
knowledge of who we are
and why we're here.
>>LISA: And to do that, we
have to basically realize
where we are as a society
and then get to that point,
because several of us don't even
know that that level exists.
So we're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back, we're
going to explore more
about how to live with
non-duality and non-separatism
when we come back with
my guest Andrew Cohen.
We'll be right back.
Welcome back.
My guest is Andrew
Cohen, and we're
talking about practical and
evolutionary enlightenment.
And we were talking
before the break
about how to take the
concepts of non-duality
and apply it to
our everyday life.
And how do you have
goals and aspirations
when you're realizing that
everything is interconnected?
So you explained that we're
in this era of a postmodern
predicament.
Can you tell us a
little bit about that?
>>COHEN: Well, the
whole notion of what
I call the postmodern
predicament is
that since the '60s
generation-- I'm a baby boomer.
I'm 56.
And you look like you're maybe
next generation after me.
>>LISA: Getting there, yeah.
>>COHEN: Yeah.
But so starting with
the baby boomers,
the postwar generation,
and our children,
and our children's
children, we fall
into the category of whom I
call the luckiest people that
have ever been born.
We are-- We
experience a standard
of living that's historically
unprecedented-- wealth,
comfort, a level
of education that's
historically unprecedented.
We have freedom of thought,
freedom of opinion,
freedom of movement.
Most of us can more or less
do anything that we want.
>>LISA: We could travel
wherever we want.
>>COHEN: Within reason,
we can more or less
do anything we imagine.
>>LISA: Now, you're talking
about-- those things
that you're saying with access
to education, and access
to higher education, and
so forth, all of this
requires money.
>>COHEN: Yeah.
But what I'm saying
is there are many,
many-- there's many, many, many,
many of us, billions of us,
right?
And so it starts with
the postwar generation,
the baby boomer generation,
our children, our children's
children fall into the category
of, historically speaking,
the luckiest people
that have ever
been born in the history
of human civilization
for all the reasons
that we just described.
And what's interesting--
what's interesting
is that, objectively,
it's true we
are luckier than any other
group of human beings
that's ever been born.
But we don't seem to feel lucky,
or we don't seem to know that--
>>LISA: Right.
>>COHEN: --we're the luckiest.
And that's the problem.
And if you get to know a lot of
these so-called luckiest people
that have ever been
born, if you get
to know what their inner
lives are like, a lot of us
feel-- experience alienation,
existential confusion,
victimization, a lot
of victimization.
>>LISA: Loneliness.
>>COHEN: Loneliness
and insecurity.
And so that creates quite a--
there's quite an irony in that,
that the luckiest people
that have ever been born
in the history of human
civilization generally
don't recognize the fact that
they're the luckiest people
that have ever been born--
>>LISA: We're still
trying to achieve--
>>COHEN: --and don't
feel very lucky.
>>LISA: No.
>>COHEN: And so
that's a very big part
of the postmodern predicament.
And I think that the
solution to this-- this
is a cultural epidemic.
It's not a personal problem.
>>LISA: Well, so how do
you create the future,
where-- and how does
that relate to evolution?
How do you-- I mean,
we're into this place
of constantly wanting to
improve the quality of our lives
through this, that,
and the other thing.
How do you go towards the future
and still create this feeling
of--?
>>COHEN: Well, there's one
other element to the postmodern
predicament, which
is that in the '60s,
there was-- the cultural
revolutions that
were so dramatic and
extraordinary that happened
in the 1960s were all
about-- it was all about
liberation, liberation
of the individual.
>>LISA: Right.
>>COHEN: And so this gave rise
to the women's movement, which
was such a profoundly
progressive step
forward for culture.
And there was the
Civil Rights Movement
for the equal rights
for any individual.
And there was also
the Me Generation.
It was all about me.
And I grew up in that time.
My parents said,
sweetheart, you should
do whatever is going
to make you happy.
>>LISA: Right.
>>COHEN: And my
teachers told me,
you should do whatever is
going to make you happy.
So I, like many of my-- like
many others from my generation,
I just grew thinking that
the world was my oyster.
Nobody ever told me
that I had an obligation
to anyone or anything.
I just simply looked
at life at how--
what was I going to do that
was going to make me happy.
And this has created a
culture of narcissism.
And my generation
tends to be-- we
tend to be very narcissistic.
Our children-- Our children
>>LISA: Don't you think
the Millennials and all
the generations right
now tend to be that way?
>>COHEN: Well, it's
largely for these reasons.
And so the postmodern
predicament
is both that we're the luckiest
people that have ever been born
and we don't know
it, plus the fact
that we have grown up in a
culture of narcissism, which
tends to have made
us very profoundly
self-centered and
self-concerned.
And a narcissistic
individual is someone
who thinks about me 24/7.
>>LISA: Only me.
How is it going to work for me?
>>COHEN: Yeah, and right.
And I always tell people--
>>LISA: How does
that apply to me?
>>COHEN: Yeah, yeah.
But I always tell people
it's not a personal problem.
It's a cultural epidemic.
And so what do we do about this?
So psychotherapy is
not going to help
us deal with the
problem of narcissism.
And so I think that,
to me, that human life,
if it's not connected to a deep
source of meaning and purpose--
in other words, that my--
without it being connected with
a deep source of
meaning and purpose,
we're going to find
ourself adrift,
experiencing all the things
we spoke about before,
alienation--
>>LISA: Loneliness.
>>COHEN: --alienation,
loneliness.
>>LISA: Achieving the dream
and never getting there.
>>COHEN: And also existential
confusion, like why am I here?
Some people even say, I
didn't ask to be born.
I don't even know if
I want to be here.
I mean, outrageous
things like that.
>>LISA: And shallower
relationships.
>>COHEN: Well,
shallower relationships.
And for example, now, for
example, with birth control,
many people choose
to have children
because they feel,
if I have a child,
it will give me a
sense of purpose.
And there's nothing wrong
with having children.
It's a wonderful and a
good thing to have-- to do.
But if people have
children because they
don't feel a sense
of purpose, it
doesn't seem to be-- it's a sign
that, at the level of culture,
something's missing.
And so I-- to me-- so
therefore, the solution
to this postmodern
predicament is
the discovery of a non-relative
or an absolute context,
a big source of meaning
for why I'm here
and for why you're here.
And if we don't discover
a bigger sense of purpose
for why I exist,
for why you exist,
we're going to be looking
for more relative ways
to find a source of
meaning that ultimately
aren't going to do it.
I mean, human beings have been--
And so I think the
answer to that question
is, I think, now in
the 21st century,
is the awakening to evolution.
Evolution's the biggest new
idea in the last 200 years.
>>LISA: So it gets us out
of a place of narcissism
and into an evolutionary
conversation.
You're saying
that's the solution?
>>COHEN: Well, because
the question is,
well, we want to blow open
the context of my life.
So if my life is all about
me and my personal fears
and personal desires, the
context is completely narrow.
Everything that
happens is all in
this small, self-referential--
self-referencing.
>>LISA: Survivalistic.
>>COHEN: But it's a
bubble of self-reference.
So when you start
teaching people
about what science has
discovered about who we are,
it blows people's minds.
And so what that
means is that we're
part of a process, a
cosmic process, that
blew into existence
14 billion years ago.
And it's a great mystery that
out of no thing whatsoever,
there was this huge,
cosmic explosion, which
gave rise to matter and energy.
Matter and energy
gave rise to life.
And life gave rise to
mind and consciousness,
self-consciousness,
subjectivity, interiority,
and mind.
And the thing about--
when we realize
that, we begin to see--
our sense of history
begins to go from just
me and my personal life--
and not just the history
of me personally,
not just this
history of my family
or my ethnic group or my nation,
but the history of the cosmos
then relates to my experience
of my physical experience,
my biological experience, my
experience of consciousness
and cognition that relates
back to the beginning
of the universe.
I realize that the-- that all
of my exper-- all the experience
I'm having right now
is inherently related
to the creative process,
right, that my body is made up
of atoms and
molecules, that we're
born at the very
beginning of this process.
I realize that my
mind and capacity
for thinking about life
and assuming perspectives
is related to the
evolution of human culture.
That my aspiration to want
to become more conscious
is related to the fact that
the universe is actually
trying to evolve at the
level of consciousness.
And when you experience the
spiritual impulse, which
is the aspiration to
become more conscious,
you realize, well,
who I am is really
the energy and intelligence
that created the universe
and is creating the universe.
It's called Eros.
It's the drive to exist.
It's the creative
motive in the universe.
And that motive is trying to
understand itself, know itself,
realize itself, recognize
itself, and give rise to itself
through me in my best moments.
And I realize, well, that's
what's happening here,
that this body, this
mind, this personality,
is a sh-- this is a sheath.
The body's a sheath.
The mind and the
personality are a--
or is a sheath through which
the energy and intelligence that
created the universe and
is creating the universe
can engage with itself.
That human-- with
human consciousness,
with highly evolved
evolution can become
conscious of itself.
Evolution awakens to itself.
>>LISA: So there's no space
for narcissism in evolution.
There's no space for survival,
really, in evolution,
if you are taking this
concept of the stress
that we are experiencing.
And you gave me a
great answer earlier
about the internal
stress that we
feel that we're experiencing
is actually creative stress.
And if you could reframe
the whole concept
into this creative
stress, that is a great--
>>COHEN: Well, there's positive
stress and negative stress.
So in other words,
for example, if, you
know-- if you,
for example, let's
say you're trying to-- you
want to run up a mountain,
or you want to run a
marathon or something.
And so then you--
that's gonna take-- you
are going to engage
with enormous stress
in order to achieve your goal.
But it's positive
because you're trying
to be able to do something that
maybe you've never done before.
So it's-- what you're
doing is very constructive.
And so because you're trying
to achieve a goal that you've
never achieved before,
you're engaging
with stress very
consciously and deliberately
so you can make a
breakthrough to a higher
level of your own capacity.
And so you experience
stress then,
but it's experienced
as a positive stress.
It's not something that's in
your way that's dragging you
down, that's making you
feel miserable all the time.
>>LISA: Right.
It's regenerating
self, actually.
>>COHEN: It's life generating.
Because you're engaging
with the stress,
it's making it
possible for you to--
>>LISA: To grow.
>>COHEN: Well, to grow
and to realize capacities
that you wouldn't be
able to do unless you
engage with that stress.
So when you realize that the
creative process as a whole
is very stressful,
that, for example,
when nothing came-- to put
it in theological terms, when
God created the universe, it
wasn't a big peaceful event.
The creative process
isn't peaceful.
The creative process is
one big explosion, right?
It was one big explosion.
And life could only
emerge because stars
collided into each other.
When they collided
into each other,
they created more
complex compounds
that would create
the conditions that
would make it possible
for life to emerge.
And the whole process
of the evolution of life
itself is all about
positive friction.
Even if you observe
people making love,
life gives rise to itself from
creative or positive friction,
right, biologically.
And also at the
level of culture.
When you see-- when philosophers
are struggling with ideas,
there's a positive
creative friction.
When you see marvelous jazz
musicians that are improvising,
there's a creative friction.
So the-- which is--
you can see which--
So creativity is inherently
about positive stress
or positive friction.
That's good.
And when you realize
that the creative process
is about positive stress
or positive friction--
>>LISA: That's a--
brilliant, yes.
>>COHEN: --your
relationship to life changes
because you know
you want to do more.
You want to accomplish more.
>>LISA: And you're
excited and invigorated
by the process of
experiencing that level.
>>COHEN: And of
making breakthroughs,
and of making breakthroughs.
>>LISA: That's positive.
I love that.
That's creative stress.
That's a great term.
There's a self-confidence
that comes
to that that's not narcissistic.
There's something
that's, as you call,
spiritual self-confidence--
>>COHEN: Yes.
>>LISA: --that comes
from something like that.
>>COHEN: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>LISA: There's a
whole video I want
you to take a look at
that kind of explains all
that Andrew's talking about.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>What is a human
being like when
he or she is
spiritually absolutely
convinced in the overwhelmingly
positive nature of existence?
So what if you were
convinced beyond any doubt
whatsoever that
to exist is good,
that the will towards
existence is positive?
A lot of people aren't so sure.
Because they say, well, look,
you know, there's poverty.
There's inequality.
There's environmental
degradation.
There's fascism, and all
kinds of awful things
happen in the world.
And nature, look
what nature is doing.
Nature has tsunamis
and volcanoes.
I mean, it's a very
dangerous place to be.
Well, life is a kind
of a dicey thing.
You don't know what
you're going to get.
If we look at all these
particular problems and all
these unpleasant and nasty
and horrible things that
can happen, do happen,
will happen, have always
been part of the process,
we're start-- suddenly
we're not so sure that
to exist is too good.
We can say, well,
living-- to exist is good,
but then there's pain.
There's suffering.
There's death.
What about all that?
Why is there suffering?
How could God exist as
long as there's pain?
That kind of thing, right?
So what if, in the midst of all
this complexity and adversity,
if you knew without any
doubt that the urge to exist,
which relates to the Big
Bang-- I interpret the Big Bang
as the desire to exist
in time and in form.
So what if you knew without any
doubt that the desire to exist
was overwhelmingly
positive, in spite
of all the terrible things
that happen in the process,
in the midst of it?
But if you knew that
the will to exist,
which started with the Big
Bang, and which we experience
as the sexual impulse,
as the creative impulse,
as creative inspiration--
that the will to exist,
the will towards life, and
the will towards creativity
is overwhelmingly
positive, without any--
it's absolutely
positive and good.
Would that change your
relationship to life?
Because you know
that life is good.
Even though bad stuff
happens, you still know
that life is good, the
will to exist is good.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: It really
makes a lot of sense.
It really brings us
to the conversation
of what true-- what the answers
are to purpose on this planet,
and what we're here to
really ultimately achieve,
and then what we're
here to leave behind.
That makes a lot more sense.
So how do you create?
How do you express
this creativity?
How do you create
something out of nothing?
>>COHEN: Well, first, I
think, what we have to do
is we have to realize that the
evolutionary process is always
happening.
We don't live-- the cosmos
is not a static place.
It's a place of constant
and perpetual change.
So the evol-- evolution means
we're on a moving train.
We're all on a train
that's going somewhere.
And so a big part
of this shift has
to do with a shift of our
own consciousness, a shift
of our own perspective
that we can see.
We feel that we're all part
of this trajectory, right?
It's just-- It's a-- This
movement is happening
at the level of the cosmos.
It's happening at
the level of biology,
and it's happening at
the level of culture.
We're on a moving train.
We're going somewhere.
>>LISA: It's all
about change, too.
We can't go somewhere
unless things
continue to change, right?
>>COHEN: Well, evolution
is really about emergence.
And the whole
notion of emergence,
which originally came to us from
biology, is-- reveals to us,
really, the mystery of
the creative process.
And that is, how can
greater complexity
emerge from lesser complexity?
And this is when there
are these leaps forward.
There's a sud--
Suddenly, something
emerges that, from a
human point of view,
we wouldn't have previously
imagined would be possible.
>>LISA: Like the internet--
>>COHEN: For example.
>>LISA: --for example.
>>COHEN: Yeah,
yeah, for example.
But why this is very-- the
whole notion of emergence,
how that relates to the new
evolutionary spirituality
is that once we
have-- once we've
realized a level of wealth
and material comfort
and abundance that the
luckiest people that are ever
born already have, what is
the purpose of our existence?
Are we here merely just to--
so we can achieve a greater
level of comfort, so
that we can consume more,
so we can experience a greater
level of peace and well being?
Are we here just to consume?
And I think that once we
to the point where we're
no longer living at
the level of survival--
and for most of human
history, most human beings
have been doing that.
But once life isn't
about survival,
it becomes about creativity.
>>LISA: Less about consumption
and more about creativity.
>>COHEN: Well, it begins to take
on a religious-- or religious
or spiritual-- a religious or
spiritual sense of purpose.
The creative process
begins to take
on a religious or
spiritual magnitude for us.
And the question is,
is my relationship
to life inherently creative?
Am I--
Because the thing is, we have
to understand that evolution
used to happen at an
unconscious level biologically.
The evolutionary process
happens at an unconscious level.
But now at the level
of human culture,
in terms of what we
think about our future,
where we're going at
the level of culture,
of our shared culture,
depends upon the choices
we make, the actions we take.
And so, if we're--
so the future,
the evolution of culture, is
only going to happen through
our conscious--
>>LISA: Conscious
decisions, actions.
>>COHEN: Yeah, but our
conscious aspiration
to go to places at
the level of culture
that we've never been before.
And so are we-- because
where we are now culturally,
we seem to be in a cul-de-sac
at the level of culture.
It's very difficult to know at
this point for a lot of people,
well, what is the
purpose of the--
what is the purpose of my life?
If we have a--
Like, I know you have
a young daughter.
If I was to have a young child
today, what would you say?
Well, you should-- the reason
for your life is so that you
can make-- you get a good job
so you can make a lot of money
so you can give your
kid a good education
so, when he or she grows
up, they can, you know,
they can get a good
education, they
can get married and give their
kids a good-- Is that why
we're here?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>COHEN: So when we realize that
the evolutionary process is now
really dependent upon us, and
it's not happening consciously,
that the future is going to
be determined by the actions
we take and the choices we make.
So when we think about our lives
and when we think about choices
and we think about
what we're doing,
does it relate to the
unmanifested potential
that there is in the future?
Do we-- do we see
that we could be
catalysts to new potentials
and new possibilities
for human beings at the
level of culture that
doesn't exist before?
Do we imagine?
Do we have the capacity
to imagine and relate
to life with that
big a perspective?
Because this is what I'm
trying to get people to do.
>>LISA: Well, this is
very important, yes.
Because my nine-year-old ask
me, what is my purpose in life?
She was just kicking the
soccer ball around asking,
what is my purpose?
And that is such an
important question to ask
>>COHEN: What did tell her?
>>LISA: I said, to help others.
That's ultimately
what I-- I'm going
to model through my purpose.
And my purpose here is
to impart information,
to help people get to this
next state of evolution
in their practical
everyday lives.
I bring it down to
a practical level.
But think about
teenagers and adolescents
that are hitting that age where
there's the rites of passage
are gone.
And there's not so much
of a ceremony or tradition
around any longer into
this modern tradition,
modern society, that we're in.
All of that's disappeared.
So how do you teach
this evolution,
modern practical evolution, to
a nine-year-old, to a teenager,
to a 30-year-old?
>>COHEN: Well, what we need to
do for children and adults is
to awaken them, to point out to
everybody that, hey, everybody,
we are all products of a cosmic
process that's going somewhere.
And human beings are the eyes
and the ears and the heart
and the mind of the
cosmos, of this process
that's going somewhere.
That there-- We realize
now that there's
no such thing as some
kind of spiritual being
that exists outside the process
that's somehow affecting change
in the process, that the energy
and intelligence that gave
rise to the creative process,
the energy and intelligence
that created the universe
and is creating the universe
is inherent in the process.
That energy and intelligence
is awakening to itself in us
when we realize,
oh, my goodness,
I am the cosmos awakening
to itself in human form.
And so therefore, when
we look at the future,
it's we are the energy
and intelligence that
created the universe awakening
to what we've created
and looking towards the future.
And then we realize,
this is mine.
When you asked me before
about non duality--
and evolutionary non
duality means I am,
you are, that singular
energy and intelligence
that chose to take
that leap from nothing
to something, from
being to becoming,
from formlessness to form.
Because before the universe was
created, there was only one,
right?
And at the beginning,
when you see
that this is one
creative process,
that the creative motive in
the universe is a singularity,
and when you experience
the creative motivation
in the universe, you
experience what I experience,
which is ecstasy and urgency.
Ecstasy and urgency
is the experience
of the evolutionary impulse.
>>LISA: It's so interesting
coming from someone like you.
But do you recommend
to other people
seeking spiritual teachers,
seeking outside themselves
for this sense of
enlightenment if you're
saying that that
all is within us?
Then it begs the question
of religion and morality.
I mean, do we look inside
ourselves for that?
I got to ask you.
>>COHEN: No, no, sure.
Well, I mean, when we want to
learn about anything that we
don't know a lot about, we
tend to look for guidance
from individuals that have a
lot more experience than we do.
So we want to learn
about physics.
We might read about physics.
And we might go
to somebody who's
a master of the discipline.
And so internal development
and internal evolution
is also-- some
people have journeyed
a lot farther in terms of
eternal-- internal evolution
development than others.
And so historically, when
someone has wanted to evolve
internally, they've sought out
the guidance and the direction
of individuals that have gone
a lot farther than they have,
that have demonstrated that they
seem to have access to a level
of depth of
consciousness, cognition,
and understanding and higher
development that a lot of other
people don't.
And so historically,
human beings
have sought the
guidance of other people
that have gone farther
than they have.
I mean, the spiritual journey
is the journey from the gross
to the subtle, and so-- and
then from the subtle to the more
subtle and the subtle
to the even more subtle.
So there are rare individuals
that have awakened completely
on their own without any
help or guidance whatsoever.
But they're the exception
rather than the rule.
But you have to
remember, we live
in the me culture
and the I culture.
And part of it is nobody
tells me what to do.
And so there-- In
the narcissism there
is-- if I'm permitted to
say such a thing-- there's
the arrogance of
already knowing.
I think I already
know everything.
And I think if we want
to develop spiritually,
we have to be able to
cultivate humility.
We have to be
willing to understand
there's an enormous
amount that we don't know.
>>LISA: Well there has
been a drifting away
from organized
religion as a society.
>>COHEN: Well,
organized religion.
And what you're
talking about is--
are the traditional
religious paths.
Well, the issue there
is because they're
based upon-- they're
mythical traditions.
They're based upon
great myths that
with the Western enlightenment,
with the birth of science,
there was a recognition that,
you know, some of these--
>>LISA: Don't make sense.
>>COHEN: Well, yeah,
some of the assertions
of the great traditions
just aren't true.
And so what's important
now is that we
embrace a rational spirituality
and a rational mysticism,
one that will not
contradict science,
if it's going to be accepted
at a level of culture.
>>LISA: Right.
Well, that's where your
teachings and understanding
more about evolution and
enlightenment come into play.
And you teach-- there's
five tenants that you teach
about getting people-- if
you're looking for those steps,
or where to start now, or
a place to-- an entry point
to get into what it means to
explore your own purpose here
on this planet.
Let's go through some of those
that you teach in your book.
>>COHEN: OK, so
the first one has
to do with becoming
very clear about what's
more important than
anything else in life.
I mean, I think that's
the most important one.
And that's a question a lot of
people don't ask themselves.
They say, what do
I-- what is more
important than anything else?
Based on my own life
experience, what
have I realized is more
important than anything else,
you know?
>>LISA: So getting clear
about something that's
more important than
anything in life.
The clarity itself is
what you're talking about.
>>COHEN: What's going to
become the focal point?
What is it that we're
going to organize
everything else in
our life around?
A lot of people drift.
A lot of people
are just drifting
through sexual
relationships and jobs--
>>LISA: --without an intention.
>>COHEN: --and hobbies.
You say, well, that's cool.
But what's the
bigger picture here?
What's your compass?
What's your pole star?
What's the North Star?
A lot of people say,
well, I don't really know.
So the clarity of
intention here is
becoming very clear about
some big meta perspective.
What's more important
than anything else?
>>LISA: What is yours?
Where are you going?
>>COHEN: Well, for me, the
evolution of the-- what
Ken Wilber, the great
American philosopher,
calls the interior
of the cosmos.
The evolution of the
interior of the universe
is what my life is
completely dedicated to.
And I'm completely
committed to emergence.
Emergence is when something that
never existed before suddenly
appears, right?
And so I am committed
through the work
I'm doing to leave
in my wake emergent
potentials in
consciousness and culture
that didn't exist before.
It's a very kind
of bold aspiration.
And the whole-- this whole
notion of emergence, I think,
is very key to giving the
luckiest people that have ever
been born a sense of purpose.
Because these emergent leaps
are all about-- evolution
is all about.
So if you say-- well, there's--
one writer recently said there
was not one big bang,
but three big bangs.
So the first one is how
did energy and matter
emerge from primordial
emptiness, no-thing-ness?
That is a quantum leap.
So that's an example
of emergence.
How did energy and matter
emerge from absolutely nothing
whatsoever?
The second big bang is
how does biological life
emerge from energy and
apparently dead matter?
And the third big
bang is how does
mind-- how does
mind, interiority,
and mind in culture
emerge from life?
And so those are examples
of these three big bangs,
or these three leaps in
the creative process,
these extraordinary leaps
that defy our understanding.
These are leaps
that are-- they're
quantum leaps in complexity, in
developmental and evolutionary
complexity, that are
ultimately mysterious.
And so when we
reali-- when we look
back from where we are
to see where we came from
and we see that we're
a product of emergence,
that we are emergence
in progress,
and we realize that the
future of the evolution
of the universe, which
is going to happen
at the level of culture,
is going to depend upon you
and me, we're going to need
to assume a relationship
to the human
experience that's going
to make it possible
for creative leaps
forward to happen through us.
>>LISA: OK.
So that is your big,
very big intention.
>>COHEN: It's an inherently
creative relationship
to existence that's not just
about me becoming, learning how
to paint or learning
how to write.
It's not only about my
own self actualization.
It's about the evolution of
the interior of the cosmos
through me.
And to me, when you get--
when we get this idea,
it's the most exciting,
inspiring, thrilling
recognition of who I am and what
the purpose of existence is.
>>LISA: And that takes you
to the second tenant, which
is that power of volition
to get you to that place.
>>COHEN: Right.
So the first one, then, so then
my intention-- my intention
then becomes, really, the
evolution of the interior
of the cosmos, the
evolution of the cosmos,
the evolution of the world.
And my reason for existence
is for the evolution
of the world through
me, the evolution
of human consciousness
and culture through me,
which is the evolution
of the cosmos.
So that shift means, if
you take that seriously,
if one takes that seriously,
it completely compels
you to transcend the fears
and desires of the small self,
the small ego, which
is really worried
about me and my little life.
>>LISA: Where the stress
is, where the stress is.
>>COHEN: And suddlenly,
you're realizing, wow,
this is about living the biggest
life possible for the biggest
reason.
So that's what the first
tenant's all about.
And that's the
most important one.
>>LISA: It chunks up,
and it gets you out
of your current
level of reality.
>>COHEN: Well you start
living big, you know?
You start living a big
life, not a small life.
And that takes guts.
It takes courage.
It takes inspiration.
The law of volitionality
is all about choice.
It basically says that we
have to transcend the victim
position.
We have to get over it
radically, unconditionally,
once and for all and forever.
So in order to do that, we
have to take responsibility
for the consequences
of everything that's
ever happened to us.
We've all been hurt,
wounded, traumatized,
victimized in some
way or shape or form.
Life is a bumpy ride, like
we were saying before.
It's full of nicks,
bruises, and scratches.
And instead of feeling resentful
and blaming other people,
we have to realize
that, you know,
life is full of-- everybody's
doing the best they can.
Life is full of ignorance
and unconsciousness.
Everybody makes mistakes.
And people made mistakes.
I suffered.
You suffered.
Other people have suffered.
The consequences of
all that's my problem.
It's nobody else's problem.
My karmic predicament is
my own karmic predicament.
I blame no one for my own
circumstances, number one.
And the law of volitionality
says that I also
have to take responsibility
for all of my own choices.
My life is my own problem
and my own solution.
I take unconditional
responsibility for the choices
that I make.
I blame no one else for
my life circumstances,
and I take full
responsibility for my failures
and my victories.
It's all me.
And so this is fully
empowering, you know?
This is how we get
to a point of sel--
It points us in the
direction of self mastery
because we take a radi--
There's a radical sense
of responsibility we take for
the totality of our condition.
>>LISA: I would've
never gotten that
from the words, the
power of volition,
until you just
explained it that way.
Because volition really takes
you into a forward place,
momentum, moving forward,
rather than getting stuck.
>>COHEN: Well, no,
but it also means,
once we take responsibility
for all that,
we want to make the right
choices for the right reasons.
So if I say the most
important thing is
the evolution of
consciousness and culture,
then that would mean that
the big choices that I
make in relationship
to life should
be expressions of
that big intention.
>>LISA: I see.
I see.
>>COHEN: Then my choices
would be expressions
of that which I said
is most important.
>>LISA: OK.
And so then once you have
found out your intention
and then move through with
the power of volition,
then you get into
the third tenant.
>>COHEN: Well, OK, so the
third one, the third tenant
is what I believe
is the ultimate form
of spiritual practice.
And all mystical schools point
to the practice of awareness.
That's really-- All schools,
enlightenment schools
or mystical schools, tell us
that it's all about cultivating
the capacity for awareness.
So the third tenet
says, if you want
to become an
enlightened human being,
if you are to be so bold as
to declare that you are going
to be able to actualize the
evolution of the interior
of the cosmos, you
have to make sure
that you're no longer
going to be acting out
of unconscious motives.
You have to become an infinitely
more conscious person.
So the way you
become conscious is
by paying a lot more attention
to what you're doing.
>>LISA: So that's the
awareness of facing everything.
>>COHEN: Well, when you face
everything and avoid nothing--
because often, the
left hand doesn't
know what the right hand
is doing for many of us.
We say one thing.
We do another.
We don't know how did I end
up in this situation again
and again and again.
When I thought I was going
here, I ended up there.
And the question is because the
self is fundamentally divided,
consciously and unconsciously.
We're divided against ourselves.
And so the idea
here is when you get
behind this primary intention,
which is the first tenant,
you can unify yourself
around one motive, right?
And then when you take
responsibility for all of it,
you can take responsibility
around this one motive.
And then how you
stay on track is
you start paying more
attention than most people do
to what you're doing
and why you're doing it.
Because you realize your
choices are important,
because they're going
to have consequences.
And if you care, not
just about yourself
and your own happiness, but
the evolution of the interior
of the cosmos, the
evolution of culture,
the evolution of
the world, you have
to make sure that you
don't make big mistakes
and that your choices
are a clear expression
of your highest intentions.
In order to do that,
there has to be a greater
degree of awareness
that we bring
to every single moment, not just
the moments when we're sitting
in meditation, but
the-- We always
have to be paying attention
to what am I doing?
>>LISA: How are
we in relationship
to what we're doing?
>>COHEN: Yeah, what am I
doing, and why am I doing it?
And then we all--
we're all crazy.
The conditioned mind is crazy.
>>LISA: What do you mean
by that, we're all crazy?
>>COHEN: Well, because--
because if you-- all any of us
has to do is just monitor
the wandering mind.
And we're all full of crazy--
>>LISA: Thoughts.
>>COHEN: --the crazy thoughts,
crazy desires, crazy fears,
ambitions.
>>LISA: Where does that
stem from, the egoic mind?
>>COHEN: Well, it stems from
our biological instincts
compel us to have-- compel us
in certain directions, which
is-- you know, which
is-- there is--
we have-- at least
men, especially,
have an unending
sexual aspiration,
which stems from biology.
So that's one level which,
from a purely rational point
of view, seems a
little bit crazy.
There's all-- We can have a
lot of unconscious feelings
of-- unconscious and conscious
feelings of unworthiness.
A lot of people feel unworthy,
a lot of self hatred.
>>LISA: Mhm.
Where does that all stem from?
>>COHEN: Well, I mean, these
all come from childhood neuroses
and from-- And it's also
another cultural epidemic.
So many people feel unworthy.
The luckiest people that
have ever been born--
and you have to appreciate the
irony of the luckiest people
that have been born feeling not
good enough, feeling unworthy.
And I went through a
lot that in my own life,
as so many other
people have done.
Then there can be unwholesome
people, the competitiveness,
a lack of compassion, a lack
of sympathy with other people,
a lot of this stuff.
And it's all-- You
have to understand
this is all part of
the human experience.
And the thing is, we
want to get to the point
where we're so awake
to our higher impulses
that we're able to bear
witness to this stuff
without acting out of it.
>>LISA: So you observe it.
You avoid nothing.
>>COHEN: Bear witness.
>>LISA: You face it and
observe it and avoid it.
>>COHEN: Right.
Bear witness to it.
>>LISA: Don't avoid it.
>>COHEN: But don't
act out of it.
Because the idea
is we don't want
to start acting out of this
stuff in such a way that's
going to cause-- have
consequences in the real world.
And we're going to suffer.
We and other people
are going to have
to suffer the consequences.
>>LISA: And then that gets us
to the fourth tenant, which is--
>>COHEN: But that third
one, the face everything,
is very-- it's challenging.
It's the ultimate practice
to face everything
without avoiding it.
>>LISA: I understand
getting stuck
at that level for
a little while.
>>COHEN: The practice of
deep and profound awareness--
the fourth one
we've been speaking
about quite a bit
together today.
And that's the
process perspective.
And that's realizing--
that's realizing
that I am and you are
and we all are products
of a cosmic process that
had a beginning in time
14 billion years
ago and that we--
that there was this big cosmic
explosion of energy and matter
that gave rise to life, that
gave rise to mind, that gave
rise to culture, that gave
rise to this body, this mind,
and this personality-- is
an inseparable part this one
process.
And so then we begin
to see everything
I experience in
ter-- everything I
experience at the
level of biology,
my physical experience,
my biological experience,
my psychological experience,
my personal experience,
that everything happen--
my spiritual experience.
Everything we
experience internally
and everything we see externally
that's happening in the world
is all part and parcel
of this one process.
It's all one process
that's unfolding.
So we see everything
from the perspective
of this one process.
We don't see just
discrete events.
My life is not a discrete--
>>LISA: It's the non duality.
>>COHEN: Right.
In Mahayana Buddhism,
they have what's
called dependent origination.
It's the similar idea
that everything exists--
that exists depends upon
everything else that exists,
right?
Everything is dependent
upon everything else.
And so the unenlightened
perspective
is the false-- is
imagining falsely
that I am a discrete event,
you're a discrete event.
And there's nothing
discreet about these events.
These-- We're-- Everything is
intermingled with everything
else.
>>LISA: That's important
to continue to repeat that.
>>COHEN: Oh, endlessly.
>>LISA: Non dualism
and the we are
one concept all go together.
>>COHEN: Exactly
>>LISA: And then the
fifth tenant being about--
>>COHEN: --cosmic conscience.
Well, cosmic conscience
relates to this.
Because what-- if live in the
world of your personal ego,
your fears and your desires
relate to yourself personally.
And everything's about me.
What's good for me?
What do I want?
What am I afraid of?
OK?
But when you have-- when
you awaken to evolution
and you realize that my ego is
just a small part of who I am,
and who I really
am is the ener--
is the singulari--
the singular energy
and intelligence that
created the universe
and is creating the universe,
is the creative force
in the universe of Eros-- I
am that awakening to itself
in the form of this body, this
mind, and this personality--
when you grasp that, experience
that at a very deep level,
you begin to feel a sense
of enormous care and concern
about where we're all going.
You begin to feel less
concerned about me
an infinitely more
concerned about we.
>>LISA: Is that the bottom line?
>>COHEN: Yes.
>>LISA: Yes.
Is that--
>>COHEN: That's the bottom line.
>>LISA: --how it
all ties together?
>>COHEN: Well, in the
way that I approach
it, the way we
get over ourselves
is by awakening to this
big-- this ultimate context
in which-- that we all
are part and parcel of.
And that's how I think we
can get over ourselves.
Because we're like-- So there's
a sense of care and concern
that we begin to-- We awaken
to a sense of care that
wasn't there before.
We suddenly care desperately
about where we're going.
And then that becomes our
life mode, our personality,
and our life mode
of-- become-- we--
the-- Our personality
begins to become
an expression of that
care for the future.
You know, in
evolutionary-- Evolution
is all about the future.
It's all about
where we're going.
Then your traditional
enlightenment,
which is very
popular still today,
it's all about
being in the moment,
being in the present
moment, be here and now.
And I'd say-- But in the new
evolutionary enlightenment,
it's not only about being
in the present moment,
it's all about
being very conscious
of the next moment,
where we're going.
Are we concerned about
where we're going?
Are we awake to,
conscious of-- are
we reaching for
that next moment?
>>LISA: So not so much
of being here now,
but being here now and the next
moment and the next moment.
>>COHEN: Well, it's a very
future-oriented liberation.
It's a very
future-oriented-- It's
when-- If you realized that
where we were going-- if you've
realized from a
moment that-- how
you can kind of
get a sense of it.
If you realize where the future
of the entire cosmos and then--
and every-- and all
of humanity depended
upon you as an
individual-- only you.
It's a thought experiment or
kind of a metaphysical fantasy,
not really true.
But imagine if it was true that
it was-- that our future was
dependent upon you, your
choices, your actions.
You'd suddenly feel a
great overwhelming sense
of responsibility.
Your personal concerns would
disappear, wouldn't they?
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
>>COHEN: That's what
I'm talking about.
>>LISA: Absolutely, yes.
So it's a chunking up,
basically, to our--
And so people will be
called to do things
like help children
in Afghanistan
or going to different
areas to be of service.
>>COHEN: But not only that.
And that's an important
distinction you're making.
Because traditionally,
in, for example,
in Christianity-- and
Christians really, I think,
of all the traditions, have done
better at this than anybody.
If you're a good Christian, you
express your love for Christ
through loving your neighbor.
And so you're going to see
more Christians in Afghanistan
and in Haiti and other
places than you're
going to see Buddhists
or Hindus or Jews
or anybody else,
interestingly enough.
But also the-- in
Buddhism there's
a whole notion in Mahayana
Buddhism of compassion.
Traditionally, compassion,
or the selfle-- or healing
the wounds of existence,
become the expression
of enlightenment in the world.
And that's
traditionally been true.
And it's still true.
The biggest gurus in India
now do enormous amounts
of social work.
>>LISA: Physically, not
just meditating about it,
but physically.
>>COHEN: No, no, well they
medi-- but their movements have
systems in place that do
enormous amounts of social work
that uplift the poor.
So-- But what I--
But the whole notion
of what it means to help in an
evolutionary context shifts.
Because what we're talking
about is healing woundedness
and healing the
very real-- dealing
with very many real problems
that we have in the world.
But there's another issue here,
which is where we're going.
And we also have to
have our attention
on that, which is giving
rise, as I've been saying,
to potentials and
possibilities and capacities
that don't exist yet.
So it's not-- So the future
is not only about healing.
There's another emerging
expression of compassion
which is all about creating
that which doesn't exist yet.
>>LISA: That right
there can be applied
to every area of your life.
That could be
applied to parenting.
That could be applied to
your vocation in life.
That could be applied
to your relationship.
It's giving existence
to something
that doesn't exist
yet and creating
from that space is a very
powerful place to be.
>>COHEN: Well, yeah.
But I mean, the
thing is that, Lisa,
that culture are shared
agreements and shared values.
So what culture doesn't
exist out there;
it exists-- When we agree about
what's most important in life
and about what's real, we
create culture together.
And so when we talk about
creating the future,
we're actually talking about
creating new shared agreements,
creating new values.
Because that's what
culture is going
to look like in the future.
And I think that's work that's
very urgent that we need.
Because where are we going?
Everybody is talking about
technology, of course,
as leading the w-- as
shaping culture now
and having a very big effect on
the way we're relating to life
or the way we're
relating to each other.
But technology is merely
the ways and means
in which we're
sharing information.
But it doesn't
affect our values.
It doesn't affect
our shared agreements
about what's important.
>>LISA: Unless we can infuse
our values into the technology.
>>COHEN: The new values.
But we have to
create them first.
And I think-- That's
the big work at hand.
That's when you're
really creating culture.
>>LISA: Or there could
be a lack of that.
There could be a lack.
>>COHEN: There is a lack of it.
>>LISA: There could
be a lack of values
going into the internet
and a lack of culture.
>>COHEN: Well, no.
I think there are--
the values that
are there are what has
already been there.
But what we're talking about
creating new values based
upon some of these
big ideas that we've
been talking about
that are going
to help to shape
what human life is
going to look like
in the future.
And the thing is,
unless we consciously
do that, we're just
going to be taken
by the speed of
information, and we're
going to be more and
more overwhelmed by it.
And we want to become,
in a sense, not
masters of our own destiny only.
But we want to become masters
of our collective destiny.
I think that's the big spiritual
challenge for us at hand
right now.
I mean that, to me, is
really the biggest question.
>>LISA: Well, you
have done a great job
in terms of guiding us to
ask those deeper questions
and, really, to get us to
a place of possibilities
and potentials that can,
again, be created out of-- out
of this conversation right here.
So thank you so much.
>>COHEN: Thank you.
What an honor and a pleasure.
>>LISA: My, the honor
is mine completely.
So thank you very much--
>>COHEN: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: --for everything.
>>COHEN: Thank you.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And if you want to watch
a replay of this interview
and dig deeper into
these concepts,
you can go to GaiamTV.com
for more thought provoking
interviews and
inspirational films.
It's all right there
for you on GaiamTV.com.
You can sign up for a free
trial subscription right there.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.